---
title: "Playing to the Algorithm: How Spotify's Recommendations Shape Song Production (Job Market Paper)"
collection: research
permalink: /research/music-ex-machina
excerpt: 'This paper models how recommender systems on streaming platforms (e.g., Spotify) affect the characteristics of music record labels choose to release.'
---

Recommender systems have revolutionized the recorded music industry, coinciding with changes in popular music, such as shorter and more homogeneous songs. For example, the average song length on Billboard's Hot 100 has decreased thirty seconds over the last ten years, and the variance in those lengths has become smaller. I construct a structural model of the recorded music industry to estimate the supply of and demand for music on Spotify, using the Spotify-developed Music Streaming Session Dataset. I capture consumer preferences with a logit model, and I model the recommender system with a logistic regression. Producers make release decisions based on expected future profits in an oblivious equilibrium. I find that that the observed changes in song duration over the past decade may be driven more by music producers adapting their releases to align with the priorities of streaming platforms' recommender systems, rather than being a direct response to consumer preferences for more concise compositions. I also find that in the absence of recommender systems, songs are longer on average, but more heterogeneous. Many songs, however, rely on targeted recommendations to break even, so the amount of songs is smaller. Consumer welfare also decreases 13\% compared to the status quo.